# Setup

Welcome to the setup guide for the Sidra BioInformatics Data Platform. This guide will walk you through the steps required to install, configure, and initialize the platform on your system.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure your system meets the following requirements:

- Operating System: Linux (Ubuntu 22.04.2 LTS)
- CPU: 4 cores
- RAM: 8 GB
- Storage: ~300 GB

## Step 1: Install Necessary Software

### Install Node.js

```bash
curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_18.x | sudo -E bash -
sudo apt-get install -y nodejs
```

### Install Python

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y python3.11
```

### Install PostgreSQL

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y postgresql
```

### Install Git

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y git
```

### Install Visual Studio Code

```bash
sudo snap install --classic code
```

## Step 2: Clone the Project Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/deepchandra02/genomics-lab-dashboard
cd genomics-lab-dashboard
```

## Step 3: Configure the Database

To setup the database, first ensure that you have the [`psycopg2`](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg2/) library installed. 

```bash
pip install psycopg2
```

Then, open the file `database/createDB.py` and edit the details initial lines with the corrct configuration details:

```py title="database/createDB.py" linenums="4"
conn = psycopg2.connect(database="sidra", # (1)!
                        host="localhost", # (2)!
                        user="person", # (3)!
                        password="mypassword", # (4)!
                        port="5432") # (5)!
```

1.  Should be the name of the database you created in [this step iv](2. setup.md#iv-create-new-database)
2. Should be the host name of the database server. If you are running the database server on the same machine as the web server, then this should be `localhost`.
3. Should match the credentials of the database user you create later in [this step ii](2. setup.md#ii-set-database-user-and-password)
4. Should match the credentials of the database user you create later in [this step ii](2. setup.md#ii-set-database-user-and-password)
5. Should be the port number of the database server. By default, it is `5432`.

Then, open the file `database/insertDB.py` and enter the same configuration details as above.

## Step 4: Get the Database running

Once you have configured the database, you can run the `database/script.sh` in your terminal to setup the database. Navigate to the `database` directory in your terminal and execute the following command:

```bash
chmod +x script.sh
./script.sh
```
!!! Warning
    You may need to update the PostgreSQL username and password in the `script.sh` file to match your PostgreSQL installation. Additionally, ensure that the Python scripts `createDB.py` and `insertDB.py` are present in the same directory as `script.sh`.

This script is designed to set up the database for the Sidra BioInformatics Data Platform. Here is a breakdown of what this script does:

#### i. **Clear the Terminal Screen:**  
  It starts by clearing the terminal screen for a clean view of the commands and their outputs.
  ```bash
  clear
  ```

#### ii. **Set Database User and Password:**  
  The script creates the PostgreSQL user `person` and with the password `'mypassword'`.
  ```bash
  psql -U postgres -c "ALTER USER person PASSWORD 'mypassword';"
  ```

#### iii. **Drop Existing Database (if any):**  
  The script drops the existing `sidra` database if it already exists. This is to ensure a fresh start.
  ```bash
  psql -U person -d template1 -c 'DROP DATABASE IF EXISTS sidra;'
  ```

#### iv. **Create New Database:**  
  The script creates a new PostgreSQL database named `sidra`.
  ```bash
  psql -U person -d template1 -c 'CREATE DATABASE sidra;'
  ```

#### v. **Run the `createDB.py` Script:**  
  This Python script is responsible for setting up the tables and schema of the `sidra` database.
  ```bash
  python3 createDB.py
  ```

#### vi. **Run the `insertDB.py` Script:**  
  This Python script is responsible for populating the `sidra` database with initial data. The output and errors of this script are redirected to a file named `log.txt`.
  ```bash
  python3 insertDB.py > "log.txt" 2>&1
  ```
!!! Warning
    Check the `log.txt` file to ensure that the database was set up successfully. If there are any errors, you can debug them by looking at the error messages in the `log.txt` file. If there are no errors, you can proceed to the next step.


## Step 5: Setting Up the Flask Server

### Install Flask and Required Libraries

```bash
pip install Flask==2.3.2
pip install flask_cors
```

### Start the Flask Server

```bash
cd api
export FLASK_APP=app.py
flask run
```

## Step 5: Start the ReactJS Web Interface

```bash
cd web-interface
npm install
npm start
```

Your Sidra BioInformatics Data Platform should now be up and running. Navigate to `http://localhost:3000` in your web browser to access the web interface.

## Step 6: Network Configuration

- Assign a static IP address to your VM.
- Configure the necessary ports in your firewall settings.

## Step 7: Set Up Backups

- Configure daily backups for your PostgreSQL database.

## Step 8: Monitoring and Maintenance

- Set up system monitoring tools.
- Schedule regular log reviews.

!!! Update
    ## Contact for Support

    For further assistance or inquiries, please contact us at:
    - Email: [support@sidrabioinformatics.com](mailto:support@sidrabioinformatics.com)
    - Phone: +1 (234) 567-8901